so this is the new M4 equipped Mac Mini
and it's something special first of all
it's very small if you compare the size
to uh the previous generation of Mac
Mini it's like a much smaller footprint
but then when you compare it to the
current generation of Mac Studio it's
like it looks like a completely
different class of product but you'll
see in a minute the benchmarks and
performance of this thing can many cases
keep up with the Mac Studio so I bring
up the conversation of size at the start
of of this video because there is
nothing else on the market that is of
this size that has this kind of
performance and also is priced as well
as this thing is so this thing starts at
$600 retail $500 for students and I'd
argue that it's one of the best valued
products that Apple has ever put out at
least for the base model now a couple
thoughts about the design the power
button is located on the bottom and when
I first saw that I was like that's kind
of weird but having used this for a week
it's such a light and small device that
just to like tilt it up and hit it it's
effortless like you won't accidentally
press it or anything like that and how
often are you actually turning on this
on and off this machine it's like very
easy to do it even one-handed uh the
other thing is if you'll notice on the
bottom there's a circular Grill here so
this serves as an intake and the exhaust
so typically on the Mac desktops there's
like a rear mounted exhaust that kind of
sucks cool air in and then out the back
but because it's such a small device
there's no rear exhaust it's just it
sucks the cooler in goes through the
device then comes out the back portion
of this circular exhaust and it's just a
neat way for them to cool a device
that's super small because they just
didn't have the capability to put an
exhaust on the back like they typically
would on the larger desktops uh the
other thing is the built-in speaker is
significantly better than the one that
was on the previous generation of Mac
minis it's still not a great sounding
sound system it's just that for people
that want that super clean setup with no
like speakers on their desk uh you can
do that on this I think they're good
enough and loud enough for that if you
want want that speakerless setup but
also there is no mic so if you want to
have like voice calls and stuff you need
to have a webcam or some kind of audio
input device for your Communications now
in regards to Ports there are three
Thunderbolt ports on the back they're
either going to be Thunderbolt 4 or
Thunderbolt 5 depending on the chip that
you go with in terms of configurations
and on the front there's also two more
USBC ports these are not Thunderbolt
enabled but if you'll notice there are
no usba a ports at all on this device
and if you plan on connecting a keyboard
to this thing like a wired keyboard
there are a lot of keyboards out there
that still do not support like a direct
USBC to USBC connection you might need
some kind of dongle to make it work now
Apple's own peripherals have been
updated they now support USBC charging
so instead of the lightning charging
hole it now supports like a regular USBC
connection the mouse the Magic Mouse has
also been updated to USBC but it's still
on the bottom like this came out in 2015
I want to say it's been like a decade of
memes of upside down charging memes on
this thing they didn't care they're like
yeah here is the new one more upside
down charging so the Macon itself this
comes in either the M4 chip or the M4
Pro chip the pro gives you more CPU and
GPU cores it also has more RAM and
storage at the base and also at the top
end but the M4 Pro chip also gets you
Thunderbolt 5 ports now Thunderbolt 5
ports are significantly higher bandwidth
than Thunderbolt 3 and four of the past
but the reality is that there's not a
lot of utility to Thunderbolt 5 outside
of displays like if you're trying to
connect super fast drives Thunderbolt 3
and four are more than enough for it if
you want to connect ultra high
resolution displays three of them to
this machine then yeah the Thunderbolt 5
connection would be useful just the base
model though already has really good
connectivity for external displays you
get three of them so the M4 and M4 Pro
chips are incredibly fast these chips
perform really well on benchmarks and
workflows that lean on really fast C
performance the multi-core performance
of the m M4 Pro is particularly
impressive to me now in terms of GPU
performance the M4 chips are a decent
step up over the M2 chips from a couple
years back but depending on your
workflow these new chips can be very
impressive so the way that I shoot my
videos that I have four 4K cameras
running simultaneously so I have one in
the back there and then I have one over
here and then I have two in front
depending on the camera angle that I
want to use I'll switch them in real
time using the uh stream deck and I'll
just swap them depending on what I want
to show you what I want you guys to look
at at a particular moment I do this
stuff during my shoot like I don't I try
not to edit so much later on I try to do
this stuff at the moment just so it
feels a little bit more live for you
guys now in order to pull this off this
needs a fairly powerful system because
this has four 4k camera feeds being
encoded at real time at once and to do
this I have an M2 Ultra system I used to
use uh like a regular Windows system RTX
490 but that thing was very loud because
you're running this thing the whole time
of the shoot and if you'll notice it's
quiet I couldn't do that with any window
system that I built but this GPU or the
the GPU cores that are inside the system
are being pushed pretty hard I wouldn't
say that's like full but that's probably
you know 60 70% of the GPU usage and
this whole thing works the only reason
why it works is because that M2 Ultra is
as powerful and as quiet as it is so the
Mac Studio handles my workflow very well
but how does the new M4 Mac Mini do this
is the same camera setup so it's four 4K
cameras being fed into the system but
it's being run off of the M4 Pro Mac
Mini and you can tell the GPU pressure
is pretty high right it's going full
blast and the 14 CPU cores are ripping
but it keeps up and this is all real
time like it's being recorded and
encoded off of that device now when I
first set this up I tried to use the M2
Pro Pro Mac Mini to tie everything
together and it wasn't even close this
thing was dropping frames like crazy and
I think it was just the it's just a very
demanding workflow when you have
realtime encoding of multiple cameras
it's tough especially if you want to do
it quietly so when the M4 Mac Mini
showed up I was like I wanted it to work
so badly cuz this is so small and
compact it'd be such a testament to how
powerful this thing really is if it
could do this and it did granted the M2
Ultra Does It Better there's more
Headroom on it but that thing's like
four times the price and like six times
the size and to do it on this system
that's so crazy cool now it does get
warm when it's going full blast for a
long period of time but it's still very
very quiet and for all intents and
purposes it's pretty much a silent
machine uh now quick note on gaming so I
think because this thing is priced the
way that it is relatively inexpensively
and because it's as powerful as it is at
that price point I've already seen a lot
of kind of Articles and Publications
clickbait around the idea of like you
know the Mac Mini is the is a p is five
killer it is not so yes it does have
inexpensive Hardware like a console and
it does have very powerful capabilities
kind of like a console way more powerful
than a console but it does not have the
library of games that makes a gaming
machine so like if you want to install
crossover and play with wine and tweak
all that stuff or do like a Windows
installation or a windows partition you
can it's just that I think there's just
no it's not a gaming device it's gaming
capable and every that goes by it's even
more capable but we're so far away from
being able to call this a gaming device
that's just my take on it okay I want to
move this conversation to what I think
is the most important thing the pricing
and the configuration so at the base
price it's a very good deal but any kind
of upgrade any kind of tweak to this
configuration at the base massively
increases its price and I just have
thoughts about that this unit here that
did most of my testing on is the M4 Pro
chip it's the one that they sent out for
reviewers to kind of give the best
impression of what the M4 Mac Mini is
capable of however I think the vast
majority of people should never even
look at the pro chip because the base M4
is already very capable and unless you
know that your workflow demands some
kind of very powerful CPU and or GPU I
would not even look at that Pro pricing
just because you get amazing value at
that base chip now in terms of the RAM
and storage the ram is horrifically
overpriced the moment you start adding
stuff it's $200 for an extra 8 gigs of
RAM and then $400 for an extra 16 gigs
of ram it's painful just looking at
those numbers on their website now I did
think that when I was looking at these
things I thought we should all be really
thankful that Apple intelligence came to
life like if Apple intelligence didn't
come out then Apple wouldn't feel the
need to have 16 GB models on their base
model and we might still just be looking
at 8 gigs of RAM on this on this machine
like for real that in an alternate
universe that could actually have been
the case uh but so yeah Ram I wouldn't I
wouldn't spring for more unless you have
a very clear clear need in your mind of
like particular workflows that need it I
wouldn't even say most video editing
would need it if you're kind of like mid
moderate levels of uh video editing the
other thing is storage and the storage
is equally painful to look at I think
most people at this point recognize that
you can get external options and I think
on a system like this you're not
carrying it around it's just makes much
more sense to have an external drive
there are two kinds of externals I want
to talk about there's the regular fast
USB drives that are relatively
inexpensive but then there's the ultra
fast USB for Thunderbolt type drives and
these are crazy fast they're still not
as fast as the internal storage of the
Mac Mini but if you need really fast St
if you're working with like really large
media files and you need to process it
and just ingest it quickly on these
systems uh I would highly recommend like
a use or Thunderbolt type Drive instead
of the regular USB 3.2 or slower drives
in case you're unfamiliar with those
things uh last thing the chip for the
people that are trying to decide like
should I get the the pro or the non-pro
the pro it's like probably three $400
more just for the chip itself you do get
more RAM and storage
but if you're unsure and you're like not
you know immediately aware of that you
need to get the pro I would just get the
regular one and also think that if you
want to resell the stuff later on like
let's say you do get the regular like
base M4 and you find out a year later oh
you know I want something faster it is I
think it' be very easy to sell off a
base M4 for close to what you paid it
for that's just what I think okay uh
there there you have it that's the M4
and M4 Pro Mac Mini really awesome
system this year